\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename languide.info
@settitle Languide manual
@direntry
* Languide::			Language-guided editing.
@end direntry
@iftex
@finalout
@afourpaper
@end iftex
@c %**end of header
@c  Status: in progress
@titlepage
@sp 10
@title{Languide}
@subtitle{Language-guided editing}
@author{by J. C. G. Sturdy}
@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2005, 2006 John C. G. Sturdy

Published by John C. G. Sturdy.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

The research for which this software was written has been supported by
the Science Foundation Ireland Investigator Programme, B4-STEP
(Building a Bi-Directional Bridge Between Software ThEory and
Practice).
@end titlepage
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Languide -- language-guided editing

@c store these by makeinfo, copying them into subdirs of htdocs, tarring them up and doing 
@c scp htdocs.tar.gz jcg_sturdy@emacs-versor.sourceforge.net:/home/groups/e/em/emacs-versor 
@ifinfo
This file documents languide, the language-guided editing system.

This document applies to version 1 of languide.
@end ifinfo

Languide provides high-level editing commands, such as turning an
in-line block of code into a procedure, and substituting a call to the
procedure for the original code.

Languide uses a ``plugin'' model to provide definitions for different
programming languages, according to the current major mode. The
initial release comes with definitions for the Lisp family of
languages, and the C family. Support is planned for Perl, Shell,
Haskell and Python, but any others could be added readily enough;
@ref{Language definitions}.

Languide is one of a pair of companion packages. The other one,
Versor, provides flexible keybindings which can be used to navigate
code in terms of its structure.  Part of Versor's functionality is
provided by the lower-level parts (@pxref{Navigation}) of Languide.

Most of Languide's functionality can be, and normally would be,
accessed through Versor, but it is possible to use Languide commands
directly. This manual describes the direct use of them; for use
through Versor,
@xref{Versor and Languide, , , versor, Versor: versatile cursors for GNUemacs}.

@menu
* Introduction::                What it's all about
* Concepts::                    Languide works at a more abstract level than
                                most editor commands.
                                Its commands will probably make more sense
                                if you understand the abstractions it uses.
* Commands::                    Things Languide can do
* Region types::                Region types
* Setup::                       How to install and configure Languide
* Extension::                   How to define languages and statements
* Languide and Versor::         Interface to a companion package
                                providing easy access to commands
* Known problems::              Known problems
* Command Index::               Command Index
* Concept Index::               Concept Index

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Commands

* Alterations::                 Altering the selection
* Expression handling::         Expression handling, expressions, and functions
* Statement handling::          Statement handling
* Navigation::                  Navigation

Expression handling, expressions, and functions

* Employ variable::             Employ variable
                                Given an existing variable definition,
                                this finds any existing use of that
                                value, and substitutes the variable. 
* Convert to variable::         Convert region to variable
                                Given a region containing an
                                expression, this sets up a variable
                                initialised to that expression, and
                                replaces the original expression with
                                that variable.
* Convert to function::         Convert region to function
                                This takes the selected region,
                                defines a new function just before the
                                one containing the region, and
                                replaces the original region with a
                                call to the new function.
* Surround with call::          Surround region with call
                                This wraps the current region with a
                                call to a function.
* Remove call::                 Remove surrounding call
                                This removes the function call
                                surrounding point.
* Create function::             Create function for call
                                This creates an empty function definition
                                to suit the function call around point.

Statement handling

* Unify Statements::            Unify Statements
                                This makes the selected region into a
                                compound statement. 
* Make conditional::            Make the selected code conditional
* Make repeating::              Make the selected code iterative
* Scoping point::               Move to enclosing scoping point
                                This moves point to the most nearly
                                enclosing scoping point, that is, a
                                suitable place for putting new variables.
* Decision point::              Move to enclosing decision point
                                This moves point to the most nearly
                                enclosing decision point, that is, a
                                suitable place for putting a new condition.

Navigation

* statement-beginning::         beginning-of-statement
* statement-end::               end-of-statement
* previous-statement::          previous-statement
* next-statement::              next-statement
* whole statement::             navigate-this-whole
* statement head::              navigate-this-head
* statement body::              navigate-this-body
* statement tail::              navigate-this-tail
* statement framework::         navigate-this-framework
* Container of statement::      navigate-this-container
* Next part of statement::      statement-navigate-parts-next
* Previous part of statement::  statement-navigate-parts-previous

Setup

* Configuration::               Configuring Languide

Configuration

* Auto-edit overlay face::      How to draw attention to changes away
                                  from point
* Whole statement as container::  On selecting a container, whether to
                                  make that the whole statement
* Cyclic::                      Whether statement part selection
                                  should be cyclic
* IncludeContainer::            Whether statement containers count
                                  as selectable statement parts
* Make variables interactively::  Make variables interactively

Extending Languide

* Defining languages and statements::  How to define languages and statements
* Adding commands::             Adding editing commands

How to define languages and statements

* Language definitions::        The interface for language definitions
* Defining statements::         Defining statement navigation for another language

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction, Concepts, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

Text editors have traditionally operated in terms of lines and
characters.

Languide takes a step above that, providing operations in terms of
the syntactic units (statements, expressions) that make up source
files in typical programming languages.

It aims to provide as single commands many of the routine high-level
editing actions that normally take many manual editing operations, for
example, taking a block of code and turning it into a function,
leaving a call to that function where the code originally was.
Although complex, these actions are completely stereotyped, and
therefore ripe for automation, as they do not really require human
intelligence to perform them. It is hoped that automating them will
not only reduce the workload for the user's fingers, but may also be
more reliable, and provide a more productive and relaxing working
environment.

In an attempt to break the tie with keyboard and mouse, on the whole
the commands are designed to work well with voice input. It should be
possible to work with very little need to type or pronounce syntactic
punctuation characters; these are detail that the computer should be
able to deal with, leaving the programmer to get on with the abstract
thinking. The need to issue a sequence of commands with no punctuation
leads naturally to an RPN-style semantics (which should be already
comfortable to users of HP-style calculators, Forth, and PostScript).
There is, for example, provision for selecting a statement type and
then searching for it, or inserting a template for it.

@node Concepts, Commands, Introduction, Top
@chapter Concepts

@cindex Statements
@cindex Compound statements
@cindex Expressions

This package is built around the ideas of statements, compound
statements, and expressions.

We have a general model of statements, in which a statement can have
head, body, and optionally tail parts -- for example, the three parts
of an if-then-else statement.

We also use the idea that each statement (except for a top-level
definition) is in a container, which is another statement.

Languide provides language guided editing for a variety of languages.
To provide equivalent functionality across the range of supported
language modes, we use a modal functions package which lets us give a
function separate definitions in each major mode.

Languide has two groups of commands:
@itemize
@item  high-level editing
@item  movement by statements (which you can use directly, or through
    Versor (@pxref{Versor and Languide,,,versor}), and which are used by
    the high-level editing commands)
@end itemize

@node Commands, Region types, Concepts, Top
@chapter Commands

You can access Languide's commands directly with M-x, or through a
keymap, or through a menu.  This manual will describe the commands by
their names, as used with M-x. 

Languide commands come in three groups, those substituting the
contents of the current selection with something of the same nature,
those acting on variables, expressions, and functions; and those
acting on statements.

@menu
* Alterations::                 Altering the selection
* Expression handling::         Expression handling, expressions, and functions
* Statement handling::          Statement handling
* Navigation::                  Navigation
@end menu

@node  Alterations, Expression handling, Commands, Commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Alterations

The ``alteration'' facility is always accessed through the Versor
package, although Languide provides the underlying data.

@node  Expression handling, Statement handling, Alterations, Commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Expression handling, expressions, and functions

This group of commands manipulates value handling constructs in source
code.  For example, you can select an expression (using the Versor
selection), and turn it into a variable, so that you can re-use the
same value.  Likewise, you can convert an expression into a function,
so that you can call it elsewhere. 

@menu
* Employ variable::             Employ variable
                                Given an existing variable definition,
                                this finds any existing use of that
                                value, and substitutes the variable. 
* Convert to variable::         Convert region to variable
                                Given a region containing an
                                expression, this sets up a variable
                                initialised to that expression, and
                                replaces the original expression with
                                that variable.
* Convert to function::         Convert region to function
                                This takes the selected region,
                                defines a new function just before the
                                one containing the region, and
                                replaces the original region with a
                                call to the new function.
* Surround with call::          Surround region with call
                                This wraps the current region with a
                                call to a function.
* Remove call::                 Remove surrounding call
                                This removes the function call
                                surrounding point.
* Create function::             Create function for call
                                This creates an empty function definition
                                to suit the function call around point.
@end menu

@node  Employ variable, Convert to variable, Expression handling, Expression handling
@subsection Employ variable
@findex Employ variable
The command @command{languide-employ-variable}, given an existing
variable definition, finds any existing uses of that value, and
substitutes the variable for them.

@node  Convert to variable, Convert to function, Employ variable, Expression handling
@subsection Convert region to variable
@findex Convert region to variable

The command @command{languide-convert-region-to-variable}, given a
region containing an expression, sets up a variable initialised to
that expression, and replaces the original expression with that
variable.

If @code{languide-make-variables-interactively} is non-nil, the
users chooses the scope using an interface similar to @code{isearch};
otherwise, it uses the following rules:
@itemize
@item
With no prefix arg, this tries to find the widest scope in which all
the necessary variables are bound, thus making the value re-usable
over as much code as possible. However, it does not (in the current
version of Versor/Languide) take note of assignments to those
variables, so this may not be the one you want. Future versions of the
software should handle this correctly.
@item
With a non-numeric prefix arg, it takes the nearest binding scope.
@item
With a positive numeric prefix arg, it goes out that number of binding scopes.
@item
With a negative prefix arg, it lets the user choose interactively,
just as though @code{languide-make-variables-interactively} were non-nil.
@end itemize

@node  Convert to function, Surround with call, Convert to variable, Expression handling
@subsection Convert region to function

The command @command{languide-convert-region-to-function} takes the
selected region, defines a new function just before the one containing
the region, and replaces the original region with a call to the new
function. It examines the region and the surrounding code, to find any
variables referred to in the region but defined outside it, and makes
those into arguments to the new function.

The changes it makes are highlighted until the next user input, so you
can check what it has done.

@node  Surround with call, Remove call, Convert to function, Expression handling
@subsection Surround region with call

The command @command{surround-region-with-call} wraps the current
region with a call to a specified function, such that the region
becomes the argument list of the function.

@node  Remove call, Create function, Surround with call, Expression handling
@subsection Remove surrounding call

The command @command{remove-surrounding-call} removes the function
call surrounding point. This leaves the function arguments in place of
the call.

@node  Create function,  , Remove call, Expression handling
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Create function for call

With point positioned inside a function call (currently with some
restrictions, such as not within a string literal argument to it, and
not within an inner call in creating the argument list),
@command{languide-create-function-for-call} creates an empty function
definition to suit that call, just before the current function
definition.

This lets you type a call to a function that doesn't yet exist, and
then go and create the function without having to do all of the
completely predictable manual text entry or pasting for it.

@node  Statement handling, Navigation, Expression handling, Commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Statement handling

This group of commands acts mostly on imperative statements. 

@menu
* Unify Statements::            Unify Statements
                                This makes the selected region into a
                                compound statement. 
* Make conditional::            Make the selected code conditional
* Make repeating::              Make the selected code iterative
* Scoping point::               Move to enclosing scoping point
                                This moves point to the most nearly
                                enclosing scoping point, that is, a
                                suitable place for putting new variables.
* Decision point::              Move to enclosing decision point
                                This moves point to the most nearly
                                enclosing decision point, that is, a
                                suitable place for putting a new condition.
@end menu

@node  Unify Statements, Make conditional, Statement handling, Statement handling
@subsection Unify Statements

The command @command{languide-unify-statements} makes the statement
that point, and the following N statements (where N is the prefix
argument) into a compound statement.

@node  Make conditional, Make repeating, Unify Statements, Statement handling
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Make conditional

The command @command{versor:make-conditional} makes the current Versor
selection conditional, and positions point ready for filling in the
condition. If the selection is already the body of a conditional
construct, an @code{and} construct is wrapped around the existing
condition (unless it already has one) and point is positioned for
adding a further condition.

@node  Make repeating, Scoping point, Make conditional, Statement handling
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Make repeating

The command @command{versor:make-repeating} makes the current Versor
selection be the body of a repeating construct, and positions point
ready for filling in the repeat condition.

@node  Scoping point, Decision point, Make repeating, Statement handling
@subsection Enclosing scoping point

The command @command{languide-enclosing-scoping-point} moves point to
the most nearly enclosing scoping point, that is, a suitable place
for putting new variables. This is largely used as an internal
function by Languide, but is also exposed for direct use in case it
is useful. 

@node  Decision point,  , Scoping point, Statement handling
@subsection Enclosing decision point

The command @command{languide-enclosing-decision-point} moves point to
the most nearly enclosing decision point, that is, a suitable place
for putting a new condition. This is largely used as an internal
function by Languide, but is also exposed for direct use in case it is
useful.

@node  Navigation,  , Statement handling, Commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Navigation

Languide provides a unified interface to navigating source code in a
variety of programming languages.  this functionality will normally be
accessed through the ``program'' dimensions of versor;
@ref{Program,Program coordinates,Program coordinates,versor,Versor:
versatile cursors for GNUemacs}.

The following commands are available:

@menu
* statement-beginning::         beginning-of-statement
* statement-end::               end-of-statement
* previous-statement::          previous-statement
* next-statement::              next-statement
* whole statement::             navigate-this-whole
* statement head::              navigate-this-head
* statement body::              navigate-this-body
* statement tail::              navigate-this-tail
* statement framework::         navigate-this-framework
* Container of statement::      navigate-this-container
* Next part of statement::      statement-navigate-parts-next
* Previous part of statement::  statement-navigate-parts-previous
@end menu

@node statement-beginning, statement-end, Navigation, Navigation
@subsection beginning-of-statement

The command @code{beginning-of-statement} moves to the beginning of
the current statement.

@node statement-end, previous-statement, statement-beginning, Navigation
@subsection end-of-statement

The command @code{end-of-statement} moves to the end of the current statement.

@node previous-statement, next-statement, statement-end, Navigation
@subsection previous-statement

The command @code{previous-statement} selects the previous statement.

@node next-statement, whole statement, previous-statement, Navigation
@subsection next-statement

The command @code{next-statement} selects the next statement.

@node whole statement, statement head, next-statement, Navigation
@subsection navigate-this-whole

The command @code{navigate-this-whole} selects the whole of the
current statement.

@node statement head, statement body, whole statement, Navigation
@subsection navigate-this-head

The command @code{navigate-this-head} selects the head of the current
statement, for example, the condition of an @code{if} statement.

@node statement body, statement tail, statement head, Navigation
@subsection navigate-this-body

The command @code{navigate-this-body} selects the body of the current
statement, for example, the code governed by an @code{if} statement.

@node statement tail, statement framework, statement body, Navigation
@subsection navigate-this-tail

The command @code{navigate-this-tail} selects the tail of the current
statement, for example, the @code{else} clause of an
@code{if-then-else} statement.

@node statement framework, Container of statement, statement tail, Navigation
@subsection navigate-this-framework

The command @code{navigate-this-framework} selects the framework of
the current statement, that is, the syntax that holds the statement
together, such as keywords and brackets. 

@node Container of statement, Next part of statement, statement framework, Navigation
@subsection navigate-this-container

The command @code{navigate-this-container} selects the container of
the current statement, that is, the compound statement containing it,
if any. 

@node Next part of statement, Previous part of statement, Container of statement, Navigation
@subsection statement-navigate-parts-next

The command @code{statement-navigate-parts-next} selects the next part
of the current statement. The list of parts is controlled by the
variable @code{statement-navigate-parts-include-container}; if this is
non-nil, it includes the container of the statement; otherwise, it is:
@code{("framework" "whole" "head" "body" "tail")}.

@node Previous part of statement,  , Next part of statement, Navigation
@subsection statement-navigate-parts-previous

The command @code{statement-navigate-parts-previous} selects the
previous part of the current statement. The list of parts is controlled by the
variable @code{statement-navigate-parts-include-container}; if this is
non-nil, it includes the container of the statement; otherwise, it is:
@code{("framework" "whole" "head" "body" "tail")}. 

@node  Region types, Setup, Commands, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Region types

Languide can spot some characteristics of a region, for example,
whether it is suitable to have a conditional statement wrapped around
it. This is normally displayed at the end of each versor command, if
this is enabled; see @ref{Languide Feedback,Feedback from
Languide,Feedback from Languide,versor,Versor: versatile cursors for
GNUemacs}. This may turn out to be useful for Emacspeak, too.

@node Setup, Extension, Region types, Top
@chapter Setup

To install Languide, unpack the tarball into a suitable directory, and
put that directory on your load-path.

@menu
* Configuration::               Configuring Languide
@end menu

@node  Configuration,  , Setup, Setup
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Configuration

@menu
* Auto-edit overlay face::      How to draw attention to changes away
                                  from point
* Whole statement as container::  On selecting a container, whether to
                                  make that the whole statement
* Cyclic::                      Whether statement part selection
                                  should be cyclic
* IncludeContainer::            Whether statement containers count
                                  as selectable statement parts
* Make variables interactively::  Make variables interactively
@end menu

@node Auto-edit overlay face, Whole statement as container, Configuration, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Auto-edit overlay face

Variable: languide-auto-edit-overlay-face

Type: face

Default value: '@code{((t (:background "orange")))}

How to draw attention to what languide has done.
When languide does something that involves changes away from point,
it shows the changed text in this face, until the next user input.

@node Whole statement as container, Cyclic, Auto-edit overlay face, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Whole statement as container

Variable: navigate-container-whole-statement

Type: boolean

Default value: @code{t}

Whether to include the whole statement as the container.
If this is non-nil, when you select the container of a statement,
the whole containing statement is selected, rather than just the
part of it containing the statement. For example, if you have
  if (a) @{
    b;
    c;
  @}
and are on ``b'' and select the container of b, you will get the
whole if statement, rather than just the block body.

@node Cyclic, IncludeContainer, Whole statement as container, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Navigate statement parts cyclically

Variable: statement-navigate-parts-cyclic

Type: boolean

Default value: @code{nil}

Whether to step forwards from body (or tail if present) back round to head.

@node IncludeContainer, Make variables interactively, Cyclic, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Navigate Statement Parts includes container

Variable: statement-navigate-parts-cyclic

Type: boolean

Default value: @code{}t

Whether to step forwards from body (or tail if present) or back from head, to container.

@node  Make variables interactively,  , IncludeContainer, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Make variables interactively

When @code{languide-make-variables-interactively} is non-nil,
@command{languide-convert-region-to-variable} will interact with the
user to choose a binding scope.

@node Extension, Languide and Versor, Setup, Top
@chapter Extending Languide

Languide is designed as a framework with some initial contents.  You
can and your own definitions, both of languages and of new editing
commands, and have them operate smoothly with the existing framework.
This also makes it easy to make available through Versor, the
companion package to Languide that makes it more readily accessible
through the keyboard or other forms of input. 

@menu
* Defining languages and statements::  How to define languages and statements
* Adding commands::             Adding editing commands
@end menu

@node  Defining languages and statements, Adding commands, Extension, Extension
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section How to define languages and statements

Languide comes with definitions of common statement types for several
programming languages. You can add more, and of course contribute them
for public use should you so wish.

@menu
* Language definitions::        The interface for language definitions
* Defining statements::         Defining statement navigation for another language
@end menu

@node  Language definitions, Defining statements, Defining languages and statements, Defining languages and statements
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection The interface for language definitions

Languide uses a pair of macros, @code{defmodel} and @code{defmodal},
to define functions which behave differently in each major mode. To
extend Languide to cover a mode fully, the following definitions for
it should be given, using @code{defmodal} for that mode:

@table @code
@item binding-around (whereat)
@item variables-in-scope (whereat)
@item variable-reference (varname)
@item move-to-enclosing-scope-last-variable-definition (&optional allow-conversions)
@item insert-variable-declaration (name type initial-value)
@item insert-global-variable-declaration (name type initial-value)
@item adapt-binding-point ()
@item languide-find-surrounding-call ()
@item compound-statement-open ()
@item compound-statement-close ()
@item insert-function-declaration (name result-type arglist body &optional docstring)
@item function-call-string (name arglist where)
@item deduce-expression-type (value-text where)
@item add-expression-term (operator argument from to)
@item languide-trim-whitespace (syntax-before syntax-after)
@item beginning-of-statement-internal ()
@item move-into-previous-statement ()
@item identify-statement (default)
@item versor-get-language-constants (where)
@end table

@node  Defining statements,  , Language definitions, Defining languages and statements
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Defining statement navigation for another language

The file statement-nav-directions.el implements the basic movements
needed to navigate around statements. Directions for specific
statement parts in various programming languages are defined in such
files as languide-lisp-like.el, languide-c-like.el and so forth;
languide-c-like is a fairly rich source of examples.

Normally, a sequence of directions is followed, and the last one is
taken as the result, that is, the thing to leave selected. To allow
multipart selections, as versor does, you can indicate a step of
the directions as selecting what it moves over, by wrapping it in a
call to ``@code{remember}''.

Strings in the directions are searched for (as regexps) and moved
over.

Any elisp function calls may be used in the directions, and their
effect on point will be, but those listed on
@code{statement-navigate-list-selector-functions} are treated
specially: they are expected to return a cons of the start and end
positions of the piece of text they describe. Thus, only such
functions should be used as the last step of a set of directions, and
only these should be given as the argument to ``remember''. You can
write your own functions of this nature, but you must add them to
@code{statement-navigate-list-selector-functions} for them to work
properly.

The selection functions are as follows:

@table @code
@item expression

Selects the following s-exp.

@item expressions

Selects as many following s-exps as possible at the current level of nesting.

@item expression-contents

Selects the contents of the following s-exp (but not its brackets).

@item preceding-expression

Selects the preceding s-exp.

@item statement

Selects the following statement. This is defined by
``@code{defmodal}'' definitions for the major mode concerned, for the
functions @code{move-into-previous-statement},
@code{move-into-next-statement},
@code{beginning-of-statement-internal}, and
@code{end-of-statement-internal}. (If you define these, you should
also define @code{identify-statement}, @code{compound-statement-open},
@code{compound-statement-close},
@code{insert-compound-statement-open}, and
@code{insert-compound-statement-close}.)

@item statements

Selects as many following statements as possible, at the current level
of nesting.

@item statement-contents

If the following statement is a simple statement, select it. If it is
a compound statement, select the statements that it is made of, but
not the bracketing that groups them together.

@item from-start-of-statement

Select from the start of the statement up to point.

@item (upto pattern)

Selects from point up to the start of the pattern.

@item start-of-match
@item rest-of-line

Select from point up to the end of the line.

@item block-at-this-depth

Select from point up to the last line at the same or deeper indentation.

@end table    

@node  Adding commands,  , Defining languages and statements, Extension
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Adding editing commands

Probably the main things to note in writing new languide commands are:

@itemize
@item
Languide is often accessed through Versor, and so you should
probably add a Versor wrapper command for your new Languide command.

@item
Languide draws attention to complicated things it has done by
highlighting them until the next user input.

@item

Languide uses a ``plugin'' model for language definitions, and you
should write your editing commands using the ``model'' functions that
each mode support definition fills in, so that your new commands will
do equivalent things in a range of major modes.
@end itemize

Versor wrappers for Languide commands are in
@file{versor-language-edits.el}, and you can find plenty of examples
in there. 

Insertions done in languide editing commands should generally be done
through the function @code{languide-insert}, which is like the
GNUemacs @code{insert} function, but also highlights what has
inserted, and put the highlighting on a list to be removed by a
pre-command-hook function. 

@node Languide and Versor, Known problems, Extension, Top
@chapter Languide and Versor

Although you can use languide commands directly, in which case they
act on the GNUemacs region as necessary, it will often be more
convenient to access the through the companion package, versor, which
provides a highlighted selection cursor (distinct from the GNUemacs
region) and a set of commands calling Languide to act on the selection. 

In particular, versor attaches to the cursor keys forms of movement of
the right granularity to select the kind of text area that Languide
operates on. 

@xref{Versor and Languide, , , versor, Versor: versatile cursors for GNUemacs},
for Versor's view of this connection. 

@node  Known problems, Command Index, Languide and Versor, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Known problems

Versor is still in its early days as a released package, and there are
sure to be some bugs that the author has not yet hit in his own use of
it.

Problems known to the author include:

@enumerate
@item
The ``previous statement'' movement in C is a bit erratic.
@end enumerate

@node Command Index, Concept Index, Known problems, Top
@unnumbered Command Index
@printindex fn

@node Concept Index,  , Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@contents

@bye
