\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename versor.info
@settitle Versor manual
@direntry
* versor::			Versatile cursors.
@end direntry
@iftex
@finalout
@afourpaper
@end iftex
@c %**end of header
@titlepage
@sp 10
@title{Versor}
@subtitle{Versatile cursors}
@author{by J. C. G. Sturdy}
@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2005, 2006, 2007 John C. G. Sturdy

Published by John C. G. Sturdy.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

The research for which this software was written has been supported by
the Science Foundation Ireland Investigator Programme, B4-STEP
(Building a Bi-Directional Bridge Between Software ThEory and
Practice).
@end titlepage
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Versor -- versatile cursors

@c store these by makeinfo, copying them into subdirs of htdocs, tarring them up and doing
@c scp htdocs.tar.gz jcg_sturdy@emacs-versor.sourceforge.net:/home/groups/e/em/emacs-versor
@c then log in to emacs-versor.sourceforge.net and unpack them
@c ssh -l jcg_sturdy emacs-versor.sourceforge.net
@c cd /home/groups/e/em/emacs-versor
@c tar xvzf htdocs.tar.gz
@ifinfo
This file documents versor, the versatile cursor system.

This document applies to version 1.04 of versor.
@end ifinfo

Versor, the ``versatile cursor'' package, provides, and makes easily
accessible, cursor movements in a variety of groups of ``dimensions'',
such as:

@multitable {functions} {statements} {statement-parts} {expressions} {chars}
@item
@tab
@tab pages
@tab lines
@tab chars
@item
@tab functions
@tab depth of nesting
@tab expressions
@tab chars
@item paragraphs
@tab sentences
@tab phrases
@tab words
@tab chars
@item functions
@tab statements
@tab statement-parts
@tab expressions
@tab chars
@end multitable

Versor is one of a pair of companion packages. The other one,
Languide, provides some high-level editing operations. Part of
Versor's functionality is provided by the lower-level parts of
Languide.
@xref{Languide and Versor, , Languide and Versor, languide, Languide: language guided
editing},
for more information.

@c todo: document mouse and tracking

@menu
* Introduction::                The concepts behind Versor
* Familiarization::             Learning your way around Versor
* Dimensions::                  Available coordinate systems
* Further commands::            Commands other than movement
* Refactoring::                 Refactoring and high-level editing using Languide
* Advanced features::           More advanced features
* Accessibility::               Using Versor when avoiding keyboard use,
                                or with speech output
* Versor and Languide::         Interfaces to a companion package
* Setup::                       How to install and configure Versor
* Extending versor::            Adding new commands, dimensions etc
* Analysis::                    Versor use analysis
* Versor and research::         Versor and research
* Future plans::                Future plans
* Known problems::              Known problems
* Command Index::               Command Index
* Concept Index::               Concept Index

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Aims::                        The aims of Versor
* Concepts::                    The concepts behind Versor
* Versor and GNUemacs::         Versor's interaction with the rest of GNUemacs

Concepts

* Coordinates and dimensions::  Coordinate systems and dimensions
* The selection::               The selection

Versor's interaction with the rest of GNUemacs

* Versor minor mode::           Versor as a minor mode
* Building on commands::        Building on commands

Familiarization

* Zooming::                     Zooming within a coordinate system
* Switching coordinates::       Switching between coordinate systems
* Editing::                     Editing with the selection
* Extending::                   Extending the selection
* Selecting around::            Selecting the expression around the selection

Editing with the selection

* Deleting the selection::      How to delete the selected text
* Inserting using the selection::  Inserting before, after, around or over the selection

Extending the selection

* Selecting around::            Selecting the surrounding expression

Available coordinate systems

* Cartesian::                   Cartesian coordinates
* Structural::                  Structural coordinates
* Text::                        Text coordinates
* Structured Text::             Structured Text coordinates
* Tables::                      Table coordinates
* Program::                     Program coordinates
* Markers::                     Marker coordinates

Further commands

* Deletion::                    Deletion
* Insertion::                   Insertion
* Alteration::                  Alteration
* DWIM::                        Do What I Mean
* Describing selection::        

Refactoring and high-level editing using Languide

* Expression handling::         Commands working on expressions
* Statement handling::          Commands working on statements
* Languide Feedback::           Feedback from Languide
* Summary of refactoring::      Key bindings for refactoring

Expression handling, expressions, and functions

* Convert to variable::         Convert selection to variable
                                Given a selection containing an
                                expression, this sets up a variable
                                initialised to that expression, and
                                replaces the original expression with
                                that variable.
* Convert to function::         Convert selection to function
                                This takes the selection,
                                defines a new function just before the
                                one containing the selection, and
                                replaces the original selection with a
                                call to the new function.
* Surround with call::          Surround selection with call
                                This wraps the selection with a
                                call to a function.
* Create function::             Create function for call
                                This creates a new function to suit
                                the function call around point
* Remove call::                 Remove surrounding call
                                This removes the function call
                                surrounding point.

Statement handling

* Unify Statements::            Unify Statements
                                This makes the selection into a
                                compound statement.
* Make conditional::            Make the selected code conditional
* Make repeating::              Make the selected code iterative
* Remove control::              Remove a control construct
* Decision point::              Move to enclosing decision point
                                This moves point to the most nearly
                                enclosing decision point, that is, a
                                suitable place for putting a new condition.

Advanced features

* Detect text in code::         Text in code
* Per-buffer dimensions::       Per-buffer dimensions
* Per-mode dimensions::         Per-mode dimensions

Accessibility

* TLC-mode::                    Two-Letter Commands (or TLC)
* Pedals::                      Using pedals
* Reversing::                   Reversing the selection motions
* Voice input::                 Using voice input
* Speech output::               Using speech output
* Flexi-choose::                The flexible chooser
* Other input devices::         Future interface possibilities

TLC-mode

* TLC Movements::               TLC Movements
* TLC Dimensions::              TLC Dimensions (D for Dimension)
* TLC Search::                  TLC Search (S for Search)
* TLC Insert::                  TLC Insert (J as variant of I)
* TLC Delete/Copy::             TLC Delete/Copy (K for Kill)
* TLC Transpose::               TLC Transpose (T for Transpose)
* TLC Versor and Languide::     TLC Versor and Languide (L and ;)
* TLC Miscellany::              TLC Miscellany

Setup

* General configuration::       Some options to set when loading
* Dimensions available::        Dimensions you can choose from, for each mode
* Using Configure::             Configuring versor using M-x configure

Using Configure

* Motion::                      
* Status::                      
* Other control::               

Motion

* Allow move to end of last::   
* Move out when at end::        
* Statement up to next::        
* Trim item starts::            
* Level wrap::                  
* Meta level wrap::             
* Phrase end::                  
* Reversible::                  

Status

* Show both dimensions::        
* Multi line level display::    
* Use face attributes::         
* Highlight with brackets::     
* Change cursor color::         
* Selection attribute::         
* Verbose::                     
* Try to display whole item::   

Other control

* Statement insertion with dummy value::  
* Reindent after insertion::    
* Per buffer::                  
* Auto change for modes::       
* Mode current levels::         
* Text in code::                
* Announce text in code::       
* Text faces::                  
* Reformat automatically::      
* Live commentary::             
* Missed opportunities::        
* Display full choices::        
* Flexi choose upstring::       
* Flexi choose topstring::      

Extending versor

* Notes on internals::          Notes on the internals of Versor
* Adding commands::             Adding new commands
* Adding dimensions::           Adding new dimensions

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction, Familiarization, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

Versor provides, and makes easily accessible, cursor movements in a
variety of groups of ``dimensions'', such as:


@multitable {functions} {statements} {statement-parts} {expressions} {chars}
@item
@tab
@tab pages
@tab lines
@tab chars
@item
@tab functions
@tab depth of brackets
@tab expressions
@tab chars
@item paragraphs
@tab sentences
@tab phrases
@tab words
@tab chars
@item functions
@tab statements
@tab statement-parts
@tab expressions
@tab chars
@end multitable

Some of these operations are already present in GNUemacs (but not all
of them easily reachable; some require complex chording, and some may
even need to be accessed through @kbd{M-x}), and some are added by
Versor. Versor puts them all in easy reach on the arrow keys.

Although GNUemacs uses its modes to put the most useful commands for
each mode directly on single keys, there are more dimensions mentioned
above than will fit at the same time on the few arrow keys available
(just two dimensions). However, note that the available dimensions are
conveniently listed in a two-dimensional table, as above.

Conveniently, the arrow keys provide two dimensions, just like the two
dimensions of the table above. Versor uses the arrow keys themselves,
with a modifier key, to select a pair of adjacent dimensions from one
of the rows above, and assign them to the arrow keys.

You will notice (unless your display cannot render this) that a unit
of text, of the same size as the dimension you are using, will be
highlighted, after each Versor command. This is called the
@dfn{selection}; it is what Versor regards as the cursor. The normal
GNUemacs cursor appears at the start of it (or occasionally at the
end), and all normal GNUemacs operations are available and will use
the normal cursor. In GNUemacs versions from 21 onwards, the colour of
the selection highlighting changes to indicate the current dimension;
there is also an indication in the mode line.

The Versor selection highlight disappears at the start of every command
(and is restored at the end of each Versor command), so when you use
GNUemacs commands other than Versor commands, Versor quietly becomes
invisible, until you use one of its commands again.

@menu
* Aims::                        The aims of Versor
* Concepts::                    The concepts behind Versor
* Versor and GNUemacs::         Versor's interaction with the rest of GNUemacs
@end menu

@node  Aims, Concepts, Introduction, Introduction
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section The aims of Versor

Although we have the computer power to edit programs in more abstract
terms than characters and lines, and many ``natural'' programmers have
the thought power to do so, editing is still often done
character-by-character, which seems to be inefficient, unreliable, and
a waste of human effort. Versor aims to move beyond that.

Versor is also part of a research project
(@pxref{Versor and research}), which looks into whether programmers really have moved on
from thinking of edits in terms of the lines of characters that they
see on paper listing and on editor screen.

Ideally (especially for those whose hands are becoming tired of
keyboard use) it should be possible to enter and edit programs with
very little handling of individual characters. Versor tries to get as
close to this as possible. (It includes an analysis facility
(@pxref{Analysis}) to see well it is doing in this, with each
particular programmer.) All that need be entered character by
character are new identifiers and comments. It may even be possible in
future versions to offer a selection of suitable names for variables
in certain circumstances, such as @code{i} for a first index variable,
as some of these are quite stereotyped by role.

@node  Concepts, Versor and GNUemacs, Aims, Introduction
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Concepts

The main concepts within versor are the coordinate system, the
dimension, and the selection.

It may be helpful to think of the arrow keys as being two dimensions,
``Major'' and ``Minor''; some of the documentation refers to them in
these terms. The way that major and minor dimensions are related in
versor is often analogous to the way they are related in their
traditional use for cartesian coordinates: keeping going in the minor
dimension unto you reach the end of a major dimension unit will take
you into the next unit in the major dimension.

@menu
* Coordinates and dimensions::  Coordinate systems and dimensions
* The selection::               The selection
@end menu

@node  Coordinates and dimensions, The selection, Concepts, Concepts
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Coordinate systems and dimensions

A ``dimension'' is a group of related movement commands, defining the
following movements for the same kind of text unit:

@itemize
@item first
@item previous
@item next
@item last
@end itemize

A ``coordinate system'' is a group of related dimensions.

You can find what the current coordinate system is from the mode line,
or the selection colour, or by using the command
@command{versor-display-current-dimensions}.

@node  The selection,  , Coordinates and dimensions, Concepts
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection The selection

The selection is best thought of as a cursor, although it looks rather
like a GNUemacs transient region. It is normally displayed by setting
the background colour of the text it contains (you can change how it
is displayed: @pxref{Selection attribute}). Versor editing operations act
on the selection; for example, the versor ``Delete'' command deletes
the current selection.

The selection covers one or more units of the current dimension
(@pxref{Coordinates and dimensions}). For how to make it cover more
than one unit, see @ref{Extending}.

The selection is distinct from the GNUemacs region, to avoid
putting lots of marks into the mark ring.

The selection highlighting disappears when you do a non-versor action,
and reappears when you do a versor action.

@node  Versor and GNUemacs,  , Concepts, Introduction
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Versor's interaction with the rest of GNUemacs

@menu
* Versor minor mode::           Versor as a minor mode
* Building on commands::        Building on commands
@end menu

@node  Versor minor mode, Building on commands, Versor and GNUemacs, Versor and GNUemacs
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Versor as a minor mode

You can switch Versor on and off using @command{versor-mode}, which,
with no prefix argument, toggles whether Versor is active. With a
prefix argument, it turns Versor on if the prefix argument is
positive, and off otherwise.

Versor rebinds several keys, but it remembers the old bindings, so
that its commands can mimic the behaviour of a non-versor GNUemacs.

@node  Building on commands,  , Versor minor mode, Versor and GNUemacs
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Building on commands

Versor is, in part, a convenient way of accessing existing GNUemacs
functionality. Below that access layer, it also fills out the
functionality a little, including such things as motion over tabular
text. In the file @file{versor-dimensions.el} you will find the
examples you need to integrate motion commands of your own into
Versor.

@node Familiarization, Dimensions, Introduction, Top
@chapter Familiarization

The easiest way to start finding your way around Versor is to run the
demo (or to view the screenshots of it at
@url{http://www.emacs-versor.sourceforge.net/demo/}), and then start
trying things. You will first need to install Versor (@pxref{Setup}),
and call its initialisation function, indicating which set of arrow
keys you wish it to use.

To run the demo, you need to unpack the tarball, and put the versor
code directory on your @code{load-path}, with the directory
@file{demo} beside it, load the file @file{versor-demo.el}, and run
the command @command{versor-demo}. This will do an animated,
non-interactive, demo of the main features of versor.

Versor can use either the keypad arrows, or the normal arrow keys.
Because it is often useful to mix traditional movements with Versor
movements, it is recommended that you give Versor only one set of
arrow keys. The explanations here will be phrased in terms of the main
arrow keys and the key cluster that, on typical keyboards, is just
above them. @xref{Setup}, for how to set Versor up to use a particular
set of keys.

The clearest demonstration of the basic facilities of Versor is
probably to be had with a buffer containing a large number of Lisp
functions, some of them with very deeply nested expressions. Since
Versor provides commands for modification as well as navigation, we
suggest you take a copy of your sample material!

Unless customised to do otherwise (@pxref{Setup}), Versor will
start in its `cartesian'' coordinate system, which is similar to the
normal cursor keys: you can move left or right with the @key{LEFT} and
@key{RIGHT} arrow keys, and up and down with the @key{UP} and
@key{DOWN} arrow keys. (You can change the initial coordinate system,
on a mode by mode basis.)

To help you to find out what versor will do for each key, Versor
extends the GNUemacs documentation system when used on versor
functions, so you can do @kbd{C-h k} on a cursor key bound to Versor,
and it will tell you not only what Versor function it is bound to, but
also what underlying function (if relevant) will currently be used by
Versor for that key.

@menu
* Zooming::                     Zooming within a coordinate system
* Switching coordinates::       Switching between coordinate systems
* Editing::                     Editing with the selection
* Extending::                   Extending the selection
* Selecting around::            Selecting around the selection
@end menu

@node  Zooming, Switching coordinates, Familiarization, Familiarization
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Zooming within a coordinate system

@findex Zooming commands
@cindex Zooming

The @kbd{LEFT} and @kbd{RIGHT} Meta arrows zoom in and out within a
coordinate system.

You can zoom out along a series of coordinates by typing
@kbd{M-LEFT}. Now the minor cursor keys (@kbd{LEFT} and @kbd{RIGHT} arrows) will
select previous and next lines of the buffer, and the major cursor
keys (@kbd{UP} and @kbd{DOWN} arrows) will move by whole pages.  You will also
see that when you move by lines, a whole line is highlighted in a
particular colour.  This is the current @dfn{versor selection}, and
its colour provides feedback on the currently selected dimension.

@kbd{M-RIGHT} zooms back in; the finest scale in most coordinate
systems is the character.

@node  Switching coordinates, Editing, Zooming, Familiarization
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Switching between coordinate systems

@kbd{C-x} following by the @kbd{UP} and @kbd{DOWN} arrows switches
between coordinate systems.

Starting from the ``cartesian'' coordinate system, typing @kbd{C-x down}
will select a ``structural'' coordinate system, and if your current
dimension was the second one, ``lines'', you should now be in the
second of the structural coordinates, which is ``exprs'', that is,
``expressions''. The minor cursor keys will now select previous and
next s-expressions (you will see the current expression is
highlighted), and the major cursor keys will select the depth (you
will see the pair of brackets highlighted -- Versor can use multipart
selections).

You can control which dimensions are available in each mode
(@pxref{Dimensions available}).

You can also put these commands onto @kbd{M-up} and @kbd{M-down} by
putting @code{'meta} amongst the arguments to @code{versor-setup}.

@node  Editing, Extending, Switching coordinates, Familiarization
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Editing with the selection

Versor provides some editing commands which act on the current selection.

@menu
* Deleting the selection::      How to delete the selected text
* Inserting using the selection::  Inserting before, after, around or over the selection
@end menu

@node  Deleting the selection, Inserting using the selection, Editing, Editing
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Deleting the selection

Pressing @kbd{delete} while using versor will delete the current
versor selection.  If it is a multipart selection, such as an opening
bracket and the corresponding closing bracket (as selected by the versor
``bracket nesting'' dimension), all parts of the selection will be
deleted, and will become successive elements of the kill ring.

@node  Inserting using the selection,  , Deleting the selection, Editing
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Inserting with the selection

Pressing @kbd{insert} while using versor can do many kinds of
insertion. The first thing to choose is whether you are inserting
before, after, around, or in place of, the selection. Each of these
may be done by pressing the @kbd{left}, @kbd{right}, @kbd{up} or
@kbd{down} arrow keys respectively.

Inserting around the selection will insert one item from the kill ring
before the selection, and the next item after it.  This is the
counterpart of deleting a multipart selection, such as a balanced pair
of brackets.

Inserting in place of the selection will delete the selection (putting
it onto the kill ring), and replace it with the selected insertion. A
handy tip: used with a two-part selection consisting of opening and
closing brackets, and inserting another kind of bracket, this lets you
change a matched pair of brackets from one kind to another, without
risk of losing track of which brackets are which.

Having chosen where to insert, you then press another key to decide
what to insert. The most common ones here will be @kbd{delete}, to
insert the most recently deleted text, and @kbd{(} to insert a pair of
parentheses (the opening bracket of other kinds of brackets works like
this, too).

If inserting around the selection, you can type @kbd{?} to wrap an
@code{if} statement around the selection, @kbd{@@} to wrap a
@code{while} statement around it, @kbd{=} to wrap a scoping
construct around it (like @code{let} in Lisp), @kbd{&}, @kbd{|} or
@kbd{!} to wrap an @code{and}, @code{or}, or @code{not}
expression around it.

@xref{Insertion}, for full details of the possible kinds of things to
insert.

@node  Extending, Selecting around, Editing, Familiarization
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Extending the selection

You can also extend the selection, using @kbd{C-right} and
@kbd{C-left}. If you start by moving right, the extension grows from
the end of the current selection, and moving left will shrink the
extension. If you start by moving left, the extension grows from the
beginning of the current selection, and moving right will shrink the
extension.

@node  Selecting around,  , Extending, Familiarization
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Selecting around the selection

The command @command{versor-select-surrounding} (usually bound to
@kbd{ctrl-DEL}) selects the s-exp surrounding the selection, except
for the original selection.

This is probably most usefully followed by deleting the new selection,
which will leave the original in its place. For example, this sequence
can be used to replace a function call by its argument, or to make
something that was conditional become unconditional.

@node  Dimensions, Further commands, Familiarization, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Available coordinate systems

This section describes the coordinate systems which Versor provides.
By default, all coordinates systems are available in all modes.
@xref{Dimensions available}, for how to restrict this, on a mode by
mode basis, to just the coordinates most likely to be useful in that
mode.

You can move between coordinate systems using the keys @kbd{C-x up}
and @kbd{C-x down}; alternatively, you can put these commands
onto @kbd{M-up} and @kbd{M-down} by putting @code{'meta} amongst the
arguments to @code{versor-setup}. (If you want both, include
@code{'meta 'ctrl-x}.)

@menu
* Cartesian::                   Cartesian coordinates
* Structural::                  Structural coordinates
* Text::                        Text coordinates
* Structured Text::             Structured Text coordinates
* Tables::                      Table coordinates
* Program::                     Program coordinates
* Markers::                     Marker coordinates
@end menu

@node Cartesian, Structural, Dimensions, Dimensions
@section Cartesian coordinates

@cindex cartesian co-ordinates
@cindex dimensions, cartesian

Cartesian coordinates is the Versor dimension most similar to the normal
cursor keys. The main difference you will notice is that when you have
selected ``lines'' as your current dimension, you will see a whole
line highlighted.

The dimensions available in cartesian coordinates are as follows:

@itemize *
@item characters
@item lines
@item pages
@end itemize

@node Structural, Text, Cartesian, Dimensions
@section Structural coordinates

Structural coordinates uses bracketing characters to navigate by
s-expressions (@pxref{Expressions,,,emacs}).

The dimensions specific to this coordinate system are
``exprs'', ``depth'', and ``defuns''.

Moving in the ``exprs'' dimension goes over s-expressions, that is,
balanced bracketed expressions. In the simplest case, with no
brackets, it will move over a symbol, as defined by the major mode's
syntax table. This is typically an identifier in a programming
language.

When before an ``open parenthesis'' character, moving forward in this
dimension will move to just after the corresponding ``close
parenthesis''; likewise, moving backward from just after a ``close
parenthesis'' will move to just before the corresponding ``open
parenthesis''.

The whole expression (whether a single symbol, or an expression on
parentheses) is selected.

Moving in the ``depth'' dimension goes in and out levels of
parentheses. It leaves the selection split into the opening and
closing parenthesis characters.

Moving in the ``defuns'' dimension moves over successive top-level
function definitions.

In structured text languages such as HTML, the sexp-based commands are
augmented to treat opening and closing tags as a form of parentheses;
the @code{exprs} and @code{depth} dimensions handle this. (This is
built using the ``nested blocks'' facility, which you can also use by
itself; see @pxref{Structured Text}.)

The dimensions available in structural coordinates are as follows:

@itemize *
@item chars
@item exprs
@item depth
@item defuns
@end itemize

@c todo: link to refactoring, in Languide

@node Text, Structured Text, Structural, Dimensions
@section Text coordinates

Text coordinates works in terms of natural language units such as words
and phrases.

The dimensions available in text coordinates are as follows:

@itemize *
@item chars
@item words
@item phrases
@item sentences
@item paragraphs
@end itemize

Navigating by words is slightly different from the emacs
@command{forward-word} command (@pxref{Words,,,emacs}): it always
leaves the cursor on the first character of a word.

Navigating by phrases uses the variable @code{phrase-end} to define
the end of a phrase.

The other dimensions in this group are based closely on the underlying
Emacs facilities. @xref{Sentences,,Sentences,emacs,The GNUemacs manual}, and
@xref{Paragraphs,,Paragraphs,emacs,The GNUemacs manual}.

@node Structured Text, Tables, Text, Dimensions
@section Structured Text coordinates

Structured text coordinates are similar to text coordinates
(@pxref{Text}), with the addition of moving by nested blocks as used
in many markup languages, in a manner similar to structural coordinates
(@pxref{Structural}).

The dimensions available in structured text coordinates are:

@itemize *
@item chars
@item words
@item blocks
@item block-depth
@end itemize

Nested blocks extend the idea of bracketed expressions, to things
where the brackets are not single characters but things such as HTML tags.

The definition of block syntax is mode-specific. For example, in HTML,
paired tags are defined to begin and end blocks.

The commands for moving backwards and forwards over nested blocks are
similar to those for moving over bracketed s-expressions, but use
opening and closing tags, such as those in HTML, instead of
parentheses.

Likewise, the commands for moving in and out of levels of nested
blocks are similar to those for moving in and out of bracketed lists.

In modes supported structured forms of text, Versor's sexp-based
commands (@pxref{Structural}) are extended to handle the language
syntax. This is built on top of the nested blocks facility, and
provides behaviour which is more consistent with that provided for
programming languages. This is recommended in preference to the bare
``structured text'' / ``nested blocks'' facility (which, however, is
still available should you prefer it).

An associated command is @command{another-block} which analyzes the
block before point (that is, from a closing-block construct back to
the corresponding opening-block construct), collects up all the
structuring constructs in it, and inserts a copy of those at point.
For example, if point is just after an HTML table row (so that the tag
most immediately before point is @code{</tr>}, the HTML table row
ender), @command{another-block} will find all the HTML tags back to
the corresponding @code{<tr>}, and insert them, but without the
intervening non-tag text. (This specific example is probably the most
useful use of this command, in the author's experience.)

This part of Versor is very much a work in progress, and you are
encouraged to add to the definition of block syntax for your favourite
markup language, and send it to the author of Versor. The block syntax
mechanism is defined in the file @file{nested-blocks.el}.

@node Tables, Program, Structured Text, Dimensions
@section Table coordinates

Table coordinates provides movements based on cells and rows, in
various modes for which these concepts are meaningful, such as
@code{tex-mode} and its variants, @code{html-mode} and
@code{html-helper-mode}.

@c todo: make sure that these are at least Tex, LaTeX, TeXinfo, HTML, csv; and document this

The dimensions defined in table coordinates are as follows:

@itemize *
@item chars
@item cells
@item rows
@end itemize

@node Program, Markers, Tables, Dimensions
@section Program coordinates

Program coordinates uses the syntax of programming languages to guide
to the selection movements. This uses the accompanying package, Languide
(@pxref{Top,,,languide}), to provide the primitives for moving around
source code. It is, of course, mode-specific.

Languide definitions are already reasonably comprehensive for Lisp, C,
Perl and Java, in progress for shell scripts, and planned for Haskell and
Python. They would probably not be meaningful for PostScript. You are
encouraged to contribute further or better definitions, both for the
languages already covered and for others.

The dimensions defined in program coordinates are as follows:

@itemize
@item chars
@item exprs
@item statement parts
@item statements
@item defuns
@end itemize

Apart from the statement-related dimensions, these are the same as
those in structural coordinates @ref{Structural}.

Movement by statement parts moves the selection between parts of the
current statement.  Programming language statements can typically be
divided into two or three parts, as follows:

@enumerate
@item
The head of a statement is often a condition, such as in an
@code{if} or a @code{while} statement.
@item
The body of a statement is typically another statement, or a group of
statements, such as the body of an @code{if} or a @code{while}
statement.
@item
The tail of a statement occurs in only a few statement types, such as
@code{if-then-else} or @code{try-catch-finally}.
@end enumerate

The ``statement parts'' dimension will move between these in turn, and can
also moved to the @dfn{container} of the current statement, that is, a
grouping statement surrounding it.

when you select the body of a statement, and the body is a compound
statement, you can then either:

@itemize
@item
continue moving to other parts of the same statement
@item
select statements within the body, by using the ``statements''
dimension movements
@end itemize


If using voice input (@pxref{Voice input}), it is convenient to define
commands such as ``head'', ``body'',and ``container'', so that you can
jump directly to the one you want rather than treating it as part of a
sequence. The commands @command{navigate-this-head},
@command{navigate-this-body}, @command{navigate-this-tail},
@command{navigate-this-whole}, and @command{navigate-this-container}
are available for binding directly to voice commands (or, for that
matter, to keys of their own).

The ``statement'' dimension moves between successive statements at the
same structural level. This is different from the statement movements
provided as part of the GNUemacs' C-mode, which moves in and out of
compound statements.

@node  Markers,  , Program, Dimensions
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Marker coordinates

Versor provides a miscellany of coordinate systems that work using
markers left by GNUemacs and by various packages.

The marker coordinate systems are as follows:

@itemize
@item The mark ring, by order of creation
@item The mark ring, by order of position
@item tempo template markers, as made by html-helper-mode and others
@item Else markers (from the Emacs Language Sensitive Editor by Peter Milliken)
@item Text property changes
@end itemize

@c todo: link to refactoring, in Languide

@node Further commands, Refactoring, Dimensions, Top
@chapter Further commands

As well as redefining the arrow keys, Versor takes over a few other
keys as well. The most noticeable of these is that @kbd{DEL} now
deletes the current Versor selection.

@c todo: write and document a transpose function?
@c todo: Languide smart edits -- link from here

@menu
* Deletion::                    Deletion
* Insertion::                   Insertion
* Alteration::                  Alteration
* DWIM::                        Do What I Mean
* Describing selection::        
@end menu

@node  Deletion, Insertion, Further commands, Further commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Deletion

Versor defines the @kbd{DEL} key to delete the current selection. Note
that if this is a multipart selection, such as a pair of opening
and closing brackets, all parts of it are deleted.

Deleting a multipart selection puts the parts of it into separate
entries in the kill-ring. This is compatible with Versor's insertion
commands (@pxref{Insertion}) while also keeping compatibility with
normal Emacs kill-ring use.

@node  Insertion, Alteration, Deletion, Further commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Insertion

Pressing the @kbd{INS} key gives you a choice of several ways to
insert, which you choose between by pressing one of the Versor arrow
keys.

The @kbd{LEFT} and @kbd{RIGHT} arrow keys let you insert before or after the
selection.

The @kbd{UP} arrow key inserts two entries from the kill ring,
one before and one after the selection; that is to say, it inserts
around the selection. This is compatible with
Versor's way of deleting a multipart selection such as a pair of
opening and closing brackets @ref{Deletion}.

@c The down arrow key inserts within a multipart selection. This is not
@c yet implemented.
These are defined in @code{versor-insertion-placement-keymap}.

Having chosen where to make an insertion, you must choose which one of
several kinds of things to insert.  The choices are as follows:

@table @kbd

@item delete
@item DEL
@item C-y
The top item(s) on the kill ring

@item 1..9
The top N items on the kill ring

@item C-s
the most recent search string

@item (
@item [
@item @{
@item <

A pair of brackets, the opening bracket being the character typed

@item ?
An @code{if-then} statement in the programming language handled by the
current major mode. This is meant for use when inserting around the
selection; it wraps the selection in the conditional statement.
Statement insertions such as this are very basic string insertions;
Languide (@pxref{Alterations,,,languide}) @c this reference is wrong, I think
 has more sophisticated ones,
which use the template and skeleton insertion systems, and can
maintain indentation and spacing better.

@item %
An @code{if-then-else} statement in the programming language handled by the
current major mode.

@item @@
A @code{while} statement in the programming language handled by the
current major mode.

@item =
A variable declaration in the programming language handled by the
current major mode

@item &
@item |
@item !
An ``and'', ``or'' or ``not'' expression in the programming language handled by the
current major mode

@item f
The name of the file in the next window. (if there is only one window,
the name of the file in that window is inserted).

@end table

@node  Alteration, DWIM, Insertion, Further commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Alteration

The ``alterations'' system provides a Versor style interface to
changing the text of the current Versor selection.

You can enter the alteration system by typing @kbd{M-insert}, and you
can accept the current value by typing @key{insert} or @key{return}.
You can abandon the alterations, leaving the text at its original
value, by pressing @key{delete}.

While you are doing alterations, the @key{LEFT} and @key{RIGHT} cursor
keys change the text within the selection, between several possible
values of the same kind. The @key{UP} and @key{DOWN} cursor keys
change which kind of thing you are choosing between.

The effect is similar to turning the selection into a little window
behind which you are scrolling a two-dimensional grid of possible
values.

For example, you could use the @key{LEFT} and @key{RIGHT} keys to put any local
variable which is currently in scope into the selection, and @key{UP} and
@key{DOWN} keys to switch between selecting local variables, global
variables, and expressions wrapped around a variable.

When you have got the text you want into the selection, you can use a
``select'' key (either @kbd{insert} or @kbd{return}) to accept that
selection, or a ``reject'' key (@kbd{delete}) to go back to the
original value.

The types of value available depends on the context. Possible types
include:

@itemize
@item local variables
@item global variables
@item tags in your tag table
@item functions defined in this file
@item reserved words in a programming language
@end itemize

The data used by Versor's ``alteration'' feature is provided by the
companion package, Languide (Language Guided Editing).
@xref{Alterations,,Alterations,languide,Languide: Language-guided editing}, for details.

``Alterations'' grew from the same kind of idea as DoReMi.el
(@url{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/doremi.el}), which I may
try to integrate with in future versions.

@node  DWIM, Describing selection, Alteration, Further commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Do What I Mean

Sometimes Versor deviates from its most logical design, to make sure
that the selection ends up where you are likeliest to want it.

An example of this is that if you are moving by s-expressions, and
move forward from the last one in the enclosing expression, the selection
moves to the end of the last expression, and then on past any
whitespace and comments, ending up where you are likely to want to
type the next s-expression.

However, it is still not always possible to get to exactly the right
place without using character-level movements. For these
circumstances, Versor provides a ``Do What I Mean'' (DWIM) command,
which moves the selection to a point likely to be of interest that is
otherwise hard to get at using the current Versor dimension. This
command is normally bound to the key @kbd{M-home}. Alternatively, it
can be accessed with @kbd{M-x versor-dwim}.

This function reads the user's mind, using the following algorithm:

@enumerate
@item
  Tell the user what has been done each time;
@item
  Eventually, the user will come to expect the behaviour of this
  function;
@item
  Reading what the user wants Versor to do should then usually be
  trivial.
@end enumerate

Aspects of mental state not necessary for figuring out where to leave point are
factored out of the calculations.

@command{versor-dwim} is mode-specific in its behaviour. For example,
in programming language modes, it can move point in and out of string
constants and comments.

@node  Describing selection,  , DWIM, Further commands
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Describing the selection

The command @command{versor-describe-selection}, normally bound to
@kbd{C-x ?} (or @kbd{C-?} if you are using @kbd{M-} rather than
@kbd{C-x} for selecting dimensions) will show a description of the
current selection, if it knows how to for the current mode.

Here are some sample descriptions:
@table @code
@item functor
The selection is the function-name part of a function call.
@item if-condition
The selection is the condition of an @code{if-then} or an @code{if-then-else}.
@item if-then-body; 2 parts
The selection is two statements, which make up the whole body of an
@code{if} statement that has no @code{else} clause.
@item let-bindings; 3 bindings
The selection is the entire list of variables in a form that allows
variable declarations (such as @code{let} in Lisp).
@item progn-whole
The selection is a whole compound statement of the kind that simply
sequences the statements within it.
@item symbol
The selection is just a symbol.
@item variable-binding
The selection is the declaration of a new local variable.
@end table

These descriptions are meant to be as closely equivalent as possible
between all supported programming languages. (They are used by
Languide to decide whether various high-level editing operations are
appropriate for a particular selection.)

If the variable @code{versor-describe-selection} is non-nil, this is
done automatically at the end of most Versor commands; @xref{Verbose}.

@node  Refactoring, Advanced features, Further commands, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Refactoring and high-level editing using Languide

Some more sophisticated commands, replacing long sequences of manual
keyboard labour by the programmer, are provided by the companion
package, Languide. As described here, they are accessed through some
wrapper functions which apply them to the versor selection. You can
also access these directly to act on GNUemacs region;
@xref{Top,Overview,Overview,languide, Languide: Language-guided editing}.

A typical action (probably the one the author uses most often) is
converting an expression to a local variable (so that the value can be
re-used), involving the following steps:

@enumerate 1
@item
examine the expression for the variables it needs
@item
find the nearest scoping point, or (with a prefix arg) the widest
scoping point at which all the variables needed are defined
@item
deduce the type of the expression (in statically typed languages
only)
@item
insert a declaration for a variable (with the name supplied by the
user) at the chosen scoping point, and initialize it using the
original expression
@item
replace the original expression with a use of the new variable
@item
leave the new variable at the top of the kill ring, ready to be
inserted somewhere else
@item

@end enumerate

Likewise, there is a function to turn a block of code into a function
(working out automatically what needs to be passed in as the argument
list), and replace its original occurrence with a call to the new
function.

To draw attention to what they have done, these functions highlight,
with an orange background, any changes they make away from the selection.
The highlighting is not the Versor selection, and is removed on your
next input to GNUemacs.

These commands are divided into two groups, one of them acting on
expressions (as used in both functional and imperative languages) and
one acting on statements, as used in imperative languages.

There are also facilities by which languide can tell you when it has
spotted something it knows about.

@menu
* Expression handling::         Commands working on expressions
* Statement handling::          Commands working on statements
* Languide Feedback::           Feedback from Languide
* Summary of refactoring::      Key bindings for refactoring
@end menu

@node  Expression handling, Statement handling, Refactoring, Refactoring
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Expression handling, expressions, and functions

This group of commands manipulates value handling constructs in source
code.  For example, you can select an expression (using the Versor
selection), and turn it into a variable, so that you can re-use the
same value.  Likewise, you can convert an expression into a function,
so that you can call it elsewhere.

@menu
* Convert to variable::         Convert selection to variable
                                Given a selection containing an
                                expression, this sets up a variable
                                initialised to that expression, and
                                replaces the original expression with
                                that variable.
* Convert to function::         Convert selection to function
                                This takes the selection,
                                defines a new function just before the
                                one containing the selection, and
                                replaces the original selection with a
                                call to the new function.
* Surround with call::          Surround selection with call
                                This wraps the selection with a
                                call to a function.
* Create function::             Create function for call
                                This creates a new function to suit
                                the function call around point
* Remove call::                 Remove surrounding call
                                This removes the function call
                                surrounding point.
@end menu

@node  Convert to variable, Convert to function, Expression handling, Expression handling
@subsection Convert selection to variable

@findex Convert selection to variable
The command @command{versor-languide-convert-selection-to-variable} takes the
current selection as an expression, sets up a variable (at the nearest
scoping point) initialised to that expression, and replaces the
original expression with that variable.

The variable name is left on the kill ring, ready for you to re-use,
as the likely use of this command is that you want to use a value in
two places, where it originally occurred once, in-line.

In the normal Versor key bindings, this command is bound to
@kbd{C-insert =}.

If @code{languide-make-variables-interactively} is non-nil, the
users chooses the scope using an interface similar to @code{isearch};
otherwise, it uses the following rules:
@itemize
@item
With no prefix arg, it takes the nearest binding scope.
@item
With a positive numeric prefix arg, it goes out that number of binding scopes.
@item
With a negative prefix arg, it lets the user choose interactively,
just as though @code{languide-make-variables-interactively} were non-nil.
@item
With a non-numeric prefix arg, this tries to find the widest scope in which all
the necessary variables are bound, thus making the value re-usable
over as much code as possible. However, it does not (in the current
version of Versor/Languide) take note of assignments to those
variables, so this may not be the one you want. Future versions of the
software should handle this correctly.
@end itemize

@node  Convert to function, Surround with call, Convert to variable, Expression handling
@subsection Convert selection to function

The command @command{versor-languide-convert-selection-to-function} takes the
selection, defines a new function just before the one
containing the selection, and replaces the original selection with a
call to the new function. It examines the selection and the
surrounding code, to find any variables referred to in the selection
but defined outside it, and makes those into arguments to the new
function.

A call to this function, with the appropriate argument list syntax, is
left on the kill-ring, ready for you to insert another call to the new
function, as the likely use of this command is to re-use a code block
(occurring in-line once) as a function to be called from more than one
place.

In the normal Versor key bindings, this command is bound to
@kbd{C-insert f}.

@node  Surround with call, Create function, Convert to function, Expression handling
@subsection Surround selection with call

The command @command{versor-languide-surround-selection-with-call} wraps the
selection with a call to a specified function, such
that the selection becomes the argument list of the function.

In the normal Versor key bindings, this command is bound to
@kbd{C-insert (}.


@node  Create function, Remove call, Surround with call, Expression handling
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Create function for call

With point positioned inside a function call (currently with some
restrictions, such as not within a string literal argument to it, and
not within an inner call in creating the argument list),
@command{versor-languide-create-function-for-call} (normally bound to
@kbd{C-insert e}) creates an empty function
definition to suit that call, just before the current function
definition.

This lets you type a call to a function that doesn't yet exist, and
then go and create the function without having to do all of the
completely predictable manual text entry or pasting for it.

@node  Remove call,  , Create function, Expression handling
@subsection Remove surrounding call

The command @command{versor-languide-remove-function-call} removes the function
call surrounding the selection. This leaves the
function arguments in place of the call.

In the normal Versor key bindings, this command is bound to
@kbd{C-insert )}.



@node  Statement handling, Languide Feedback, Expression handling, Refactoring
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Statement handling

This group of commands acts mostly on imperative statements.

@menu
* Unify Statements::            Unify Statements
                                This makes the selection into a
                                compound statement.
* Make conditional::            Make the selected code conditional
* Make repeating::              Make the selected code iterative
* Remove control::              Remove a control construct
* Decision point::              Move to enclosing decision point
                                This moves point to the most nearly
                                enclosing decision point, that is, a
                                suitable place for putting a new condition.
@end menu

@node  Unify Statements, Make conditional, Statement handling, Statement handling
@subsection Unify Statements

The command @command{versor-languide-unify-statements} turns the current Versor
selection into a compound statement.  In the normal Versor key
bindings, this command is bound to @kbd{C-insert @{}.

@node  Make conditional, Make repeating, Unify Statements, Statement handling
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Make conditional

The command @command{versor-languide-make-conditional} makes the
selection conditional, and positions point ready for filling in the
condition. If the selection is already the body of a conditional
construct, an @code{and} construct is wrapped around the existing
condition (unless it already has one) and point is positioned for
adding a further condition.

In the normal Versor key bindings, this command is bound to
@kbd{C-insert ?}.

@node  Make repeating, Remove control, Make conditional, Statement handling
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Make repeating

The command @command{versor-languide-make-iterative} makes the selection be the
body of a repeating construct, and positions point ready for filling
in the repeat condition.

This command is not yet implemented.

@node  Remove control, Decision point, Make repeating, Statement handling
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Remove control construct

The command @command{versor-languide-remove-control} removes the control
construct most closely surrounding the selection.

This command is not yet implemented.

@node  Decision point,  , Remove control, Statement handling
@subsection Enclosing decision point

The command @command{languide-enclosing-decision-point} moves point to
the most nearly enclosing decision point, that is, a suitable place
for putting a new condition. This is largely used as an internal
function by Languide, but is also exposed for direct use in case it is
useful.

@node  Languide Feedback, Summary of refactoring, Statement handling, Refactoring
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Feedback from Languide

If you set the variable @code{versor-describe-selection} to non-nil
(@pxref{Verbose}), Languide will tell you (at the end of any Versor
command) when you have selected a piece of code that it may have a
specific way of handling.

There is also a command of the same name, to do just that action;
@xref{Describing selection}, for details.

@node  Summary of refactoring,  , Languide Feedback, Refactoring
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Summary of refactoring commands

In the default configuration, Versor's refactoring commands begin with
@kbd{C-insert}. The following keys may be used following this:

@table @kbd
@item =
convert selection to variable
@item f
convert selection to function
@item g
convert selection to global variable
@item (
surround selection with call
@item )
remove function call around selection
@item @{
unify selected statements
@item ?
make selected statements conditional
@item @@
make selected statements iterative
@item ;
comment selection
@end table

@node Advanced features, Accessibility, Refactoring, Top
@chapter Advanced features

@menu
* Detect text in code::         Text in code
* Per-buffer dimensions::       Per-buffer dimensions
* Per-mode dimensions::         Per-mode dimensions
@end menu

@node  Detect text in code, Per-buffer dimensions, Advanced features, Advanced features
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Detect text in code

Often, source code has pieces of natural-language text embedded in it,
both in comments, and in string literals. The forms of movement that
are useful for source code are often not convenient for these embedded
pieces of text.

You can make Versor remember different current dimensions for actual
code, and for the insides of comments and string literals. You can
turn this on by requiring the feature @code{versor-text-in-code} and
setting the variable @code{versor-text-in-code} to anything other than
@code{nil}; or by including the symbol @code{text-in-code} in the
arguments to @code{versor-setup}, which does both of the above.

Then, after each movement of the GNUemacs cursor, Versor will check
whether point is now in a comment or a string literal, or in code, and
will switch its current dimension accordingly.

If you set the variable @code{versor-announce-text-in-code} non-nil,
Versor will tell you (in the echo area) when it switches between code
and embedded text.

@node  Per-buffer dimensions, Per-mode dimensions, Detect text in code, Advanced features
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Per-buffer dimensions

You can make Versor remember different current dimensions for each
buffer. You can do this by requiring the feature @code{versor-local}
and setting the variable @code{versor-per-buffer} to anything other
than @code{nil}; or by including the symbol @code{local} in the
arguments to @code{versor-setup}, which does both of the above.

@node  Per-mode dimensions,  , Per-buffer dimensions, Advanced features
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Per-mode dimensions

@c todo: this isn't right -- versor-modal is something else, that I'll
@c probably withdraw.

You can make Versor remember different current dimensions for each
mode. You can do this by requiring the feature @code{versor-modal} and
setting the variable @code{versor-auto-change-for-modes} to non-nil;
or by including the symbol @code{modal} in the arguments to
@code{versor-setup}, which does both of the above.

You can make Versor bind some of its actions in particular ways
per-mode. See the source file @file{versor-modal.el} for how to do
this. It's probably not the best way of doing anything -- it is an
early part of Versor, and the author has since added better ways of
doing most of the things it does.

@node  Accessibility, Versor and Languide, Advanced features, Top
@chapter Accessibility

Versor is designed to be usable not only through a conventional
keyboard, but also through narrow interfaces such as pedals, and
through voice recognition.

@menu
* TLC-mode::                    Two-Letter Commands (or TLC)
* Pedals::                      Using pedals
* Reversing::                   Reversing the selection motions
* Voice input::                 Using voice input
* Speech output::               Using speech output
* Flexi-choose::                The flexible chooser
* Other input devices::         Future interface possibilities
@end menu

@node  TLC-mode, Pedals, Accessibility, Accessibility
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section TLC-mode

@command{versor-tlc-mode} toggles a mode in which the printing
characters generally perform commands rather than self-inserting. Yes,
it's modal, and yes, you have to admit humbly that you-know-what does
that too. But if you're tired of modifier keys, this may be what you
need. And the commands it gives you include all the powerful versor
ones, not the low-level ed-like ones.

The key assignments are not greatly mnemonic, but they try hard to
gather around your home keys. Note for non-touch-typists: this means
the keys a touch-typist's fingers normally rest over when they've not
moved to some other key. TLC knows the layouts of various forms of
keyboards (currently only QWERTY and Dvorak, but it is easy to add
more), and attempts to bind the physical key location, rather than a
particular letter.

TLC mode is normally toggled using @command{versor-tlc-mode}, which,
in TLC mode, is bound to @key{a}. (Mnemonic from the days of ``ed'':
``Append'' what you type at point.)

The mnemonics in the following menu are based on the QWERTY letters
attached to the relevant keys.

@menu
* TLC Movements::               TLC Movements
* TLC Dimensions::              TLC Dimensions (D for Dimension)
* TLC Search::                  TLC Search (S for Search)
* TLC Insert::                  TLC Insert (J as variant of I)
* TLC Delete/Copy::             TLC Delete/Copy (K for Kill)
* TLC Transpose::               TLC Transpose (T for Transpose)
* TLC Versor and Languide::     TLC Versor and Languide (L and ;)
* TLC Miscellany::              TLC Miscellany
@end menu

@node  TLC Movements, TLC Dimensions, TLC-mode, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Movements

@node  TLC Dimensions, TLC Search, TLC Movements, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Dimensions

@node  TLC Search, TLC Insert, TLC Dimensions, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Search

@node  TLC Insert, TLC Delete/Copy, TLC Search, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Insert

@node  TLC Delete/Copy, TLC Transpose, TLC Insert, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Delete/Copy

@node  TLC Transpose, TLC Versor and Languide, TLC Delete/Copy, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Transpose

@node  TLC Versor and Languide, TLC Miscellany, TLC Transpose, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Versor and Languide

@node  TLC Miscellany,  , TLC Versor and Languide, TLC-mode
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection TLC Miscellany

@node Pedals, Reversing, TLC-mode, Accessibility
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Using pedals

The setup used by the author requires six pedals, arranged in two sets
of three. The pedals are daisy-chained into the keyboard connector,
and duplicate the actions of selected keys. One set provides the
modifiers @key{Control}, @key{Shift} and @key{Alt}, and the other
provides three types of action, referred to here as @key{Other},
@key{Move}, and @key{Select}.

If using the common commercially available pedals in which each unit
has a large central pedal and a smaller pedal along each side, the
recommended setup puts @key{Shift} and @key{Move} onto the large pedals.

@key{Move} is the main action, moving forward in the current dimension, and
corresponds to the @key{Right} cursor key. @kbd{S-Move} moves in the
other direction in the same dimension.

@key{Other} and @kbd{S-Other} provide the @key{DOWN} and
@key{UP} actions of Versor.

@key{Select} brings up a menu, using the Text Mode Menus
(@pxref{Menu Bar,,,emacs}), and you can then move along the menu using
@key{Move} and @kbd{S-Move}, and select an entry using
@key{Select}, which will either bring up a further menu, or run the
selected command.

Some of these commands read their arguments through a system built on
top of completing-read, that is designed to allow fast selection of
possibilities without needing typing. @xref{Flexi-choose}, for details
of this.

@node  Reversing, Voice input, Pedals, Accessibility
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Reversing the selection motions

To make Versor usable with a very small number of keys (for example, a
mouthswitch), it is possible to reverse the motion of Versor's
``forward'' and ``back'' commands (of all kinds, both dimensions and
both meta-dimensions (ways of choosing dimensions). This is available
through the command @command{versor-reverse}. If reversing is used, it
appears in the mode line as an arrow at the appropriate end of the
dimension indication.

This is an extreme solution, for extreme problems. It's unlikely to be
useful if you can use Versor in other ways.

@node Voice input, Speech output, Reversing, Accessibility
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Using voice input

Some parts of Versor are particularly suited to use with voice input,
such as vr-mode @url{http://emacs-vr-mode.sourceforge.net/}.

Some of the voice or menu commands read their arguments through a
system built on top of completing-read, that is designed to allow fast
selection of possibilities without needing typing. @xref{Flexi-choose},
for details of this.

@node  Speech output, Flexi-choose, Voice input, Accessibility
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Using speech output

If the variables @code{versor-speaking} (@pxref{Speech output}) and
@code{versor-describe-selection} (@pxref{Languide Feedback}) are
non-nil, Versor produces spoken feedback on changes to its state.

This may soon be replaced by proper integration with Emacspeak.

@node  Flexi-choose, Other input devices, Speech output, Accessibility
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section The flexible chooser

Flexi-choose splits a list of choices into a tree, and allows
navigation down the tree without having to either type parts of an
entry, nor having to scroll past all the ones before the one you want.
It uses similar techniques to Text Mode Menus (@pxref{Menu
Bar,,,emacs}), but constructs the menu tree on the fly.

If used with a voice extension (contact the author for details), it is
possible to say a word which occurs in the entry you want, and have
the list of choices redisplayed with only the entries that match that
word. Saying another word will narrow it down further, and so on. When
the list is down to a single entry, that one is then selected
automatically.

This should probably be integrated with the Icicles libraries,
available through
@url{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/Icicles_-_Libraries}.

@node  Other input devices,  , Flexi-choose, Accessibility
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Other input devices

As well as pedals (@pxref{Pedals}) it should be possible to extend
versor to use other input devices, such as joysticks and
mouthswitches.

For commands suitable for use with very ``narrow-channel'' input
devices, @ref{Reversing}.

Versor may be used through a gamepad or a joystick; this can provide
very swift and comfortable editing.

@node Versor and Languide, Setup, Accessibility, Top
@chapter Versor and Languide

Language provides ``language guided editing'', guiding editing
operations using the syntax of the file being edited.

The statement-based dimensions of Versor use the lower levels of
Languide, and the refactoring operations use the higher levels of it.

Languide is a cross-language package, with definitions for several
popular programming languages.

@xref{Languide and Versor, , Languide and Versor, languide, Languide: language-guided editing}, for languide's end of the story..

@node Setup, Extending versor, Versor and Languide, Top
@chapter Setup

To install Versor, unpack the tarball into a suitable directory, and
put that directory on your load-path.

From your .emacs, for the default setup, call

@lisp
  (add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/versor/lisp")

  (require 'versor)
  (require 'languide)

  (versor-setup)
@end lisp

@menu
* General configuration::       Some options to set when loading
* Dimensions available::        Dimensions you can choose from, for each mode
* Using Configure::             Configuring versor using M-x configure
@end menu

@node General configuration, Dimensions available, Setup, Setup
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section General configuration

You can control which keys are used, and which other facilities are
turned on, by giving some symbols as arguments to @code{versor-setup}.

The arguments can be any (combination) of

@table @code

@item arrows
for the main cursor keys

@item arrows-misc
for insert, delete etc

@item keypad
for the keypad cursor keys

@item keypad-misc
for keypad insert, delete etc

@item meta
to make @key{Meta} and whichever arrow keys you have selected do the
movement between dimensions; this is good if you have modifier pedals
to extend your keyboard, but is likely not to work with console input,
so may only be usable if you're using a window system such as X

@item ctrl-x
to make C-x and whichever arrow keys you have selected do the movement
between dimensions; this is the default, as it works OK on consoles as
well as with window managers
@end table

to select which keys are set up to do Versor commands.

You can turn on further facilities by including the following symbols
amongst the arguments:

@table @code

@item modal
remember a different dimension for each mode

@item local
remember a different dimension for each buffer

@item text-in-code
switch dimensions for string literals and comments,
allowing code-oriented movement in actual code, and
text-oriented movement in embedded natural language text

@item menu
define a menu of Versor commands

@item verbose
rabbit on endlessly about what it is doing

@end table

The recommended default setup is:

@lisp
(versor-setup 'arrows 'arrows-misc 'modal 'text-in-code 'menu)
@end lisp

You may then want to customize it further, like this:

@lisp
  ;; preset the dimensions for some modes
  (setq versor-mode-current-levels
	    (mapcar 'versor-mode-levels-triplet
		    '(
		      (emacs-lisp-mode "structural" "exprs")
		      (lisp-interaction-mode "structural" "exprs")
		      (c-mode "program" "statement-parts")
                      ;; using string for key means we are setting
                      ;; modes for embedded strings and comments
		      ("c-mode" "text" "chars")
		      (text-mode "cartesian" "lines")
		      (html-helper-mode "text" "words")
		      )))
@end lisp

@node Dimensions available, Using Configure, General configuration, Setup
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Dimensions available for each mode

The variable @code{versor-meta-dimensions-valid-for-modes} controls
which meta-dimensions are valid for which major modes.

If t, all meta-dimensions are allowed in all major modes.

Otherwise, it is an alist mapping modes to sublists describing the
meta-dimensions allowed in that mode.

Each sublist should begin with t, to indicate that only the
meta-dimensions listed are to be allowed, or nil, to indicate that all
meta-dimensions except those listed are allowed.

The rest of the sublist is the meta-dimensions allowed or blocked for
that mode.

The head of the node may also be a list of major modes for which this
rule applies.

A sublist for a major mode t gives the defaults.

@node  Using Configure,  , Dimensions available, Setup
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Using Configure

@menu
* Motion::                      
* Status::                      
* Other control::               
@end menu

@node Motion, Status, Using Configure, Using Configure
@subsection Motion

Control details for versor movements.

@menu
* Allow move to end of last::   
* Move out when at end::        
* Statement up to next::        
* Trim item starts::            
* Level wrap::                  
* Meta level wrap::             
* Phrase end::                  
* Reversible::                  
@end menu

@node Allow move to end of last, Move out when at end, Motion, Motion
@subsubsection Allow move to end of last

Variable: versor-allow-move-to-end-of-last

Type: boolean

Default value: 'dwim

Whether to allow moving to the end of the last sexp in a list.

Otherwise, versor-next stops at the start of it, and refuses to do
another forward move.

Setting this non-nil does what you probably want in practice, although
setting it nil is probably cleaner in some abstract sort of way.
Setting it non-nil and not t will make the last move within a list
go to just before the closing syntax of the list, which is where you
typically want to be to type the next sexp in.

@node Move out when at end, Statement up to next, Allow move to end of last, Motion
@subsubsection Move out when at end

Variable: versor-move-out-when-at-end

Default value: t
Type: boolean

If non-nil, trying to move further on when already at the end of
the last thing in a container (see versor-allow-move-to-end-of-last
will move to just after the end of the container. Can be convenient in
practice, although it breaks the symmetry of the next<-->previous
operations.

@node Statement up to next, Trim item starts, Move out when at end, Motion
@subsubsection Statement up to next

Variable: versor-statement-up-to-next

Type: boolean

Default value: nil

Whether to make a statement extend all the way to the start of the next one.
This highlights whitespace, and the author does not like it; but the code can
do it easily enough.

@node  Trim item starts, Level wrap, Statement up to next, Motion
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Trim item starts to non-space

Variable: versor-trim-item-starts-to-non-space

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to move the start of the selection so that it is not on the
whitespace between items.

To maintain consistency, it generally makes sense to adjust point so
that it's at the start of some non-blank text; most commands will
probably do this anyway, but here we just make sure, which makes it
easier to borrow underlying commands not written specially for versor.

However, it's easy to include a flag to switch this off just in case
anyone prefers it that way.

@node Level wrap, Meta level wrap, Trim item starts, Motion
@subsubsection Level wrap

Variable: versor-level-wrap

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to wrap the level changes.

If this is non-nil, going back from the first level takes you to the last one,
and going forward from the last level takes you to the first one.

@node Meta level wrap, Phrase end, Level wrap, Motion
@subsubsection Meta level wrap

Variable: versor-meta-level-wrap

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to wrap the meta-level changes.

If this is non-nil, going back from the first meta-level takes you to the last one,
and going forward from the last meta-level takes you to the first one.

@node  Phrase end, Reversible, Meta level wrap, Motion
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Phrase end

Type: regexp

Default value:  "[,;:] *"

Pattern to match the end of a phrase, for moving by phrases.

@node Reversible,  , Phrase end, Motion
@subsubsection Reversible

Variable: versor-reversible

Type: boolean

Default value: (not (eq window-system 'x))

Whether we allow reversing.

This is useful if you cannot use ``shift-next'' for ``previous'' (as
wanted for pedal use). These seem to work OK on X but not on an old
Windows Emacs; not sure about other platforms/terminals yet.

Although the platform that needed this has now moved on, the feature
is kept for possible use with very limited input devices such as
mouthswitches, thus helping to make GNUemacs accessible even to
quadriplegics.

@node Status, Other control, Motion, Using Configure
@subsection Status

How versor displays its status information.

@menu
* Show both dimensions::        
* Multi line level display::    
* Use face attributes::         
* Highlight with brackets::     
* Change cursor color::         
* Selection attribute::         
* Verbose::                     
* Try to display whole item::   
@end menu

@node  Show both dimensions, Multi line level display, Status, Status
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Show both dimensions

Variable: versor-mode-line-show-both-dimensions

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to show the major dimension as well as the minor dimension, in the mode line.
You might want to turn this off if your mode line is already has a lot in it.

@node Multi line level display, Use face attributes, Show both dimensions, Status
@subsubsection Multi line level display

Variable: versor-multi-line-level-display

Type: boolean

Default value: @code{(and (boundp 'emacs-major-version (>= emacs-major-version 21))}

Whether to use multi-line indication of the current meta-level and level.

@node Use face attributes, Highlight with brackets, Multi line level display, Status
@subsubsection Use face attributes

Variable: versor-use-face-attributes

Type: boolean

Whether to use face attributes, as provided from Emacs 21 onwards.

If these are available, it'll normally make sense to use them.
See also versor-highlight-with-brackets.

@node Highlight with brackets, Change cursor color, Use face attributes, Status
@subsubsection Highlight with brackets

Variable: versor-highlight-with-brackets

Type: boolean

Default value: (not versor-use-face-attributes

Whether to use brackets around highlighted items in status feedback.

This is useful if you can't use face attributes (see
versor-use-face-attributes).

The brackets are just in an overlay, and don't get inserted into the
buffer contents.

@node Change cursor color, Selection attribute, Highlight with brackets, Status
@subsubsection Change cursor color

Variable: versor-change-cursor-color

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to use the cursor color to indicate the level.

This refers to the normal GNUemacs cursor rather than the versor
selection (highlight) cursor. Changing the color of the ordinary
cursor gives you quick feedback on the current Versor dimension,
even when the Versor selection is not visible.

See versor-item-attribute (@pxref{Selection attribute}) for the
attribute used to change the colour (or other aspect) of the selection.

@node Selection attribute, Verbose, Change cursor color, Status
@subsubsection Selection attribute

Variable: versor-item-attribute

Type: (set (const :background (const :foreground) (const :underline))

Default value: (:background)

An attribute to use to indicate the current item.

This is looked up in the current dimension, to get the value to set it
to. For example, if versor-item-attribute is @code{:background},
@code{:background} is looked up in the current dimension, to find the
colour to set the background to.

You can only use this from Emacs 21 onwards.

@node  Verbose, Try to display whole item, Selection attribute, Status
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Show region type

Variable: versor-describe-selection

Type: boolean

Default value: t

If you set the variable @code{versor-describe-selection} to non-nil,
Languide will tell you when you have selected a piece of code that it
may have a specific way of handling.

@xref{Describing selection}, for a command of the same name, that does
this action by itself without moving the selection.

@node Try to display whole item,  , Verbose, Status
@subsubsection Try to display whole item

Variable: versor-try-to-display-whole-item

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to try to display the whole item after each movement.

This recenters the text, if possible, so both the start and the end
of it are visible.

@node Other control,  , Status, Using Configure
@subsection Other control

@menu
* Statement insertion with dummy value::  
* Reindent after insertion::    
* Per buffer::                  
* Auto change for modes::       
* Mode current levels::         
* Text in code::                
* Announce text in code::       
* Text faces::                  
* Reformat automatically::      
* Live commentary::             
* Missed opportunities::        
* Display full choices::        
* Flexi choose upstring::       
* Flexi choose topstring::      
@end menu

@node Statement insertion with dummy value, Reindent after insertion, Other control, Other control
@subsubsection Statement insertion with dummy value

Variable: versor-display-underlying-commands

Type: boolean

Default value: nil

Whether versor statement insertion puts a placeholder value in when adding something.

This tries to avoid changing the semantics, for example, it uses
"true" when adding "and" or "if".

You can then change the value, using the versor alterations system.

@node  Reindent after insertion, Per buffer, Statement insertion with dummy value, Other control
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Reindent after insertion

Variable: versor-reindent-after-insert 

Default value: t

Type: boolean

Whether Versor "around" insertion re-indents afterwards.

@node Per buffer, Auto change for modes, Reindent after insertion, Other control
@subsubsection Per buffer

Variable: versor-per-buffer

Type: boolean

Default value: nil

Whether to remember the dimensions separately for each buffer.

@node Auto change for modes, Mode current levels, Per buffer, Other control
@subsubsection Auto change for modes

Variable: versor-auto-change-for-modes

Default value: t

Whether to change the dimension on changing modes.

Type: boolean

@node Mode current levels, Text in code, Auto change for modes, Other control
@subsubsection Mode current levels

Variable: versor-mode-current-levels

Type: association list

Default value:
@lisp
        ((emacs-lisp-mode "structural" "exprs")
	    ("emacs-lisp-mode" "text" "words")
	    (lisp-interaction-mode "structural" "exprs")
	    (c-mode "program" "statement-parts")
	    ("c-mode" "text" "words")
	    (text-mode "cartesian" "lines")
	    (html-helper-mode "structured text" "words")
	    ("html-helper-mode" "text" "chars")
	    (html-mode "structured text" "words")
	    ("html-mode" "text" "chars")
	    (latex-mode "structured text" "words")
	    ("latex-mode" "text" "chars")
	    (texinfo-mode "structured text" "words")
	    ("texinfo-mode" "text" "chars")
	    )
@end lisp

This remembers the latest dimensions selected in each mode. It can be
pre-set to whatever you find convenient.

@node Text in code, Announce text in code, Mode current levels, Other control
@subsubsection Text in code

Variable: versor-text-in-code

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether versor should switch dimensions for string literals and comments.

This requires font-lock-mode to be used, as it uses that to decide
what kind of text it is on (it will have a limited attempt at doing
so itself if font-lock-mode is not used).

The current dimensions are then remembered separately, and switch to
the last one used in that kind of place, as point moves between code,
comments and strings.

See versor-text-faces for the faces used to recognize this, building on
font-lock-mode.

You can pre-set the dimensions to use for embedded text in each mode,
separately from those used for the code, by putting entries starting
with strings naming the mode symbols, into versor-mode-current-levels.

@node Announce text in code, Text faces, Text in code, Other control
@subsubsection Announce text in code

Variable: versor-announce-text-in-code

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether versor-text-in-code should put up messages telling you when changes the dimension.

@node Text faces, Reformat automatically, Announce text in code, Other control
@subsubsection Text faces

Variable: versor-text-faces

Default value: '(font-lock-string-face font-lock-comment-face)

Faces which versor regards as being text rather than code.
See versor-text-in-code-function for how this is used.

@node  Reformat automatically, Live commentary, Text faces, Other control
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Reformat automatically

Variable: versor-reformat-automatically

Type: boolean

Default value: t

If non-nil, some versor movements call reformatting commands.

@node Live commentary, Missed opportunities, Reformat automatically, Other control
@subsubsection Live commentary

Variable: versor-research-live-commentary

Type: boolean

Default value: nil

Whether to make a live commentary on versor and other activities.

@node  Missed opportunities, Display full choices, Live commentary, Other control
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Mention missed opportunities

Variable: versor-indicate-missed-opportunities

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to indicate when you used a non-versor command when a versor
command was available. For this to work, you must have given
@code{'research} among the arguments to @code{versor-setup}.

If set to 'all, shows versor commands that are not currently reachable
by direct keystrokes.

If set to a number, waits that number of seconds after telling you.

@node Display full choices, Flexi choose upstring, Missed opportunities, Other control
@subsubsection Display full choices

Variable: choices-display-full

Type: boolean

Default value: t

Whether to display in full the range of choices at each level of a treewise chooser.

@node Flexi choose upstring, Flexi choose topstring, Display full choices, Other control
@subsubsection Flexi choose upstring

Variable: flexi-choose-upstring

Type: string

Default value: [Up]

The label to indicate going back up the tree.

@node Flexi choose topstring,  , Flexi choose upstring, Other control
@subsubsection Flexi choose topstring

Variable: flexi-choose-topstring

Type: string

Default value: [Top]

The label to indicate going straight back up to the top of the tree.

@node  Extending versor, Analysis, Setup, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Extending versor

You can extend Versor to handle more types of movement, more
commands... whatever you like. Here is a brief guide to programming
Versor, to help you make your code work well with the existing
facilities.

Some facilities of Versor are provided by its companion package,
Languide.  To make Versor work with more programming languages, you
need to add navigation definitions to Languide, and Versor will they
use them automatically.

@menu
* Notes on internals::          Notes on the internals of Versor
* Adding commands::             Adding new commands
* Adding dimensions::           Adding new dimensions
@end menu

@node  Notes on internals, Adding commands, Extending versor, Extending versor
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Notes on the internals of Versor

The following notes are derived from the reply to a question about
adding an emacspeak interface to Versor.

Most versor commands have a macro wrapped around most of the command,
either @code{versor-as-versor-command} or @code{versor-as-motion-command}, both
defined in versor-commands.el.

@code{versor-as-versor-command} is a recent hack to let me turn versor
off quickly, thus making eligible to be a minor mode; if
@code{versor-mode} is nil, it just looks for whatever was previously
on the key that triggered this command, and runs that instead.

More interesting is @code{versor-as-motion-command} (probably a bit of
a misnomer by now) which is what updates the versor selection
highlight at the end of each command. To do this, it calls
@code{versor-clear-current-item-indication} before running the main
logic of the command, to get rid of the old highlight, then after
running the command-specific code that it is wrapped around, it calls
@code{versor-indicate-current-item}, which does the complicated bit.
After that, it runs any functions on @code{versor-post-command-hook}.

@code{versor-indicate-current-item} is probably the thing to advise,
but I'm happy to include emacspeak-specific code in it. It first
checks whether the internal variables indicating the selection have
been set (by the command-specific logic calling
@code{versor-set-current-item}, or @code{versor-set-current-items} if
it is a multi-part selection); if they haven't, it uses a heuristic to
set them, again using @code{versor-indicate-current-item}, which is
what generates the colourful overlays.

Then it (@code{versor-indicate-current-item}) calls
@code{versor-describe-selection} on the selection, which gets a
description of the selection, puts it in the echo area, and calls
@code{versor-speak}, which is my rudimentary attempt to interface to
emacspeak.

I'm already planning to upgrade @code{versor-describe-selection}
(which is part of languide) to give more information. From the versor
/ languide point of view, it is probably the best place to get more
spoken information.

As it stands now, it calls some mode-specific stuff (using
modal-functions.el, which is part of the download) to discover stuff
about the specified part of a buffer. Each mode's definition (see
@file{languide-lisp-like.el}, @file{languide-c-like.el} for the current support)
defines a function @code{languide-region-type} which returns things like
@code{if-then-body}, @code{if-then-else-tail}, @code{progn-whole}, @code{while-do-head},
@code{defun-body}, to describe the specified text. @code{languide-region-type} can
also set the variable @code{languide-region-detail-string} to give more
information. @code{region-type-description} converts the result of
@code{languide-region-type} into human-readable text.

There is another function which could be used to give more information
that should probably be spoken, which is
@code{establish-current-statement}, which works out the statement type
at point. If @code{languide-region-type} says that the text is a
single statement, @code{establish-current-statement} could be used to
tell you what the statement is; if it is multiple statements, it could
be used several times, to describe the region (or selection when used
by versor) succintly.

@node  Adding commands, Adding dimensions, Notes on internals, Extending versor
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Adding new commands

Most interactive Versor commands should have, as the outermost level
of their body, the macro @code{versor-as-motion-command}, which
handles the block cursor (selection highlighting). in the code within
@code{versor-as-motion-command}, you can call
@code{versor-set-current-item}, passing in the beginning and end of
the new selection, and the new selection will be displayed
automatically at the end of @code{versor-as-motion-command}. If you do
not call @code{versor-set-current-item},
@code{versor-as-motion-command} will try to work out an appropriate
selection for the current dimension.

If you want a multipart selection, you can call
@code{versor-set-current-items}, passing in a list of conses of start
and end positions, or a list of overlays.

@node  Adding dimensions,  , Adding commands, Extending versor
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Adding new dimensions

To add new navigation dimensions, you use @code{versor-define-moves},
giving it the name of your dimension, and a list of lists, each of
which begins with a key symbol and then has a value. the currently
recognised keywords are as follows:
@table @code
@item first
The command that will get you to the first item in a series.
@item previous
The command that will get you to the previous item in a series.
@item next
The command that will get you to the next item in a series.
@item end-of-item
A command to move to the end of the current item.
@item last
The command that will get you to the last item in a series.
@item transpose
A command to transpose two of these items.
@item dwim
A function to do some kind of movement based on this kind of item,
that is often useful and not easy to achieve by sequences of the other
movements.  For example, in a dimensional for use in a programming
language mode, this might take you into a string literal.
@item :background
Can be used as the way to highlight the selection, by setting
@code{versor-item-attribute} to @code{:background}. Value should then
be the colour to use.
@item :foreground
Can be used as the way to highlight the selection, by setting
@code{versor-item-attribute} to @code{:foreground}. Value should then
be the colour to use.
@end table

Any attribute named by the variable @code{versor-item-attribute} will
be used for highlighting. @code{:background} is probably the most
useful of these, but you could use @code{:foreground} or anything else
that GNUemacs can display.

@node  Analysis, Versor and research, Extending versor, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Versor use analysis

Versor provides some facilities for measuring how much you are using
it, and how much you are using non-Versor commands, and how the two
are mixed. This is partly because Versor was developed as part of some
research on the psychology of programming @ref{Versor and research},
and partly so that you can tune your own computer use, and partly to
get feedback on what needs to be added to Versor to make it a complete
way to edit programs.

To get a report on your Versor usage, use the command
@command{versor-research-report}.

To save a report each time you quit GNUemacs, arrange for
@command{versor-save-research-data} to be called by your exit
sequence. For example, you can put it onto @code{kill-emacs-hook}. The
reports are saved in the file @file{~/.versor-log} (you can change
this location by setting the variable
@code{versor-research-log-file}).

@c todo: design and write the commands for this!

@node  Versor and research, Future plans, Analysis, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Versor and research

Versor was developed as part of some research on the psychology of
programming (@pxref{Versor and research}), to see how much people editing
programs will use the facility to work at a higher level of
abstraction than the character-by-character, line-by-line level, and
how much, and when, they resort to traditional commands despite more
powerful ones being available.

Versor will be used in controlled experimental conditions for this,
but to gather wider information, the author encourages you to use
Versor's use analysis features (@pxref{Analysis}) and send in the
results (in the form of the file, normally @file{~/.versor-log} but
redefinable by setting @code{versor-research-log-file}), once you have
been using Versor for a while.

@node  Future plans, Known problems, Versor and research, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Future plans

@itemize
@item
Integration with other Emacs packages, particularly Emacspeak, and
including DoReMi and Icicles.
@item
Commands to add, remove, and swap arguments in definition and uses of
a function.
@item
Languide to support many more language modes
@item
Commands to insert statement (or other construct) templates, and to
search for statements of a given type, going via Languide's
language-independent layer. These commands will be designed to work
well with voice input, and will integrate better with Versor/Languide
than separate use of templating mechanisms.
@item
Command to show all of Versor's current status
@item
Command input from devices other than keyboard and mouse; the author
has some ideas on using a joystick for this (via the Linux Joystick
Driver and probably a glue program talking the GNUemacs via a socket).
@end itemize

The author also hopes to make Versor work with vr-mode and emacspeak
together, thus producing a ``conversational'' Emacs that can be used
entirely through an audio interface. This could be a compact and
economical approach to wearable computing, using a laptop or similar
computer in a pocket or backpack, and a bluetooth (or other) earpiece
with microphone, and no expensive head-up display, wearable keyboard,
etc.

@node  Known problems, Command Index, Future plans, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Known problems

Versor is still in its early days as a released package, and there are
sure to be some bugs that the author has not yet hit in his own use of
it.

Problems known to the author include:

@enumerate
@item
Movement by markup-based units sometimes gets stuck.
@item
The ``dimensions'' display sometimes gets mis-formatted.
@end enumerate

@node Command Index, Concept Index, Known problems, Top
@unnumbered Command Index
@printindex fn

@node Concept Index,  , Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
